Add persistent statements summary (#12069)
pingcap/docs: statement-summary-tables.md

## Limitation

By default, statements summary tables are saved in memory. When a TiDB server restarts, all data will be lost.

To address this issue, TiDB v6.6.0 experimentally introduces the [statement summary persistence](#persist-statements-summary) feature, which is disabled by default. After this feature is enabled, the history data is no longer saved in memory, but directly written to disks. In this way, the history data is still available if a TiDB server restarts.

## Persist statements summary

> **Warning:**
>
> Statements summary persistence is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.

> As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are saved in memory by default. Once a TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<CustomContent platform="tidb">

As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are saved in memory by default. Once a TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.

</CustomContent>

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are saved in memory by default. Once a TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides the configuration item `tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent` to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.

</CustomContent>
```

> As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are cached in memory by default. Once a TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are saved in memory by default. Once a TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.
```

To enable statements summary persistence, you can add the following configuration items to the TiDB configuration file:

```toml
[instance]
tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent = true
# The following entries use the default values, which can be modified as needed.
# tidb_stmt_summary_filename = "tidb-statements.log"
# tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days = 3
# tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size = 64 # MiB
# tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups = 0
```

> After statements summary persistence is enabled, the memory keeps only the current real-time data and no history data. Once the real-time data is refreshed as history data, the history data is written to the disk file at an interval of `tidb_stmt_summary_refresh_interval` described in [Parameter configuration](#parameter-configuration). Queries on the `statements_summary_history` or `cluster_statements_summary_history` table will return results combining both in-memory and on-disk data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After statements summary persistence is enabled, the memory keeps only the current real-time data and no history data. Once the real-time data is refreshed as history data, the history data is written to the disk at an interval of `tidb_stmt_summary_refresh_interval` described in [Parameter configuration](#parameter-configuration) section. Queries on the `statements_summary_history` or `cluster_statements_summary_history` table will return results combining both in-memory and on-disk data.
```

> **Note:**
>

> > - When statements summary persistence is enabled, the `tidb_stmt_summary_history_size` configuration described in [Parameter configuration](#parameter-configuration) will no longer take effect because the history data will no longer be maintained in memory. Instead, the following three configurations will be used to control the retention period and size of history data for persistence: [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660), [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660) and [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - When statements summary persistence is enabled, the `tidb_stmt_summary_history_size` configuration described in [Parameter configuration](#parameter-configuration) will no longer take effect because the memory does not keep the history data. Instead, the following three configurations will be used to control the retention period and size of history data for persistence: [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660), [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660), and [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660).
```

> > **Note:**
> >
> > - When statements summary persistence is enabled, the `tidb_stmt_summary_history_size` configuration described in the [Parameter configuration](#parameter-configuration) section will no longer take effect because the memory does not keep the history data. Instead, the following three configurations will be used to control the retention period and size of history data for persistence: [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660), [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660), and [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660).
> > - The smaller the value of `tidb_stmt_summary_refresh_interval`, the more immediate data is written to the disk. However, this also means more redundant data is written to the disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<CustomContent platform="tidb">

> **Note:**
>
> - When statements summary persistence is enabled, the `tidb_stmt_summary_history_size` configuration described in the [Parameter configuration](#parameter-configuration) section will no longer take effect because the memory does not keep the history data. Instead, the following three configurations will be used to control the retention period and size of history data for persistence: [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660), [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660), and [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660).
> - The smaller the value of `tidb_stmt_summary_refresh_interval`, the more immediate data is written to the disk. However, this also means more redundant data is written to the disk.

</CustomContent>
```

All data of the statement summary tables above will be lost when the TiDB server is restarted. This is because statement summary tables are all memory tables, and the data is cached in memory instead of being persisted on storage.

## Persist statements summary

> **Warning:**
>

> > Statements summary persistence is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or deleted, and its syntax and implementation be changed before GA without prior notice. If you find any bug, please [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Statements summary persistence is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. The syntax and implementation might be modified before GA. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.
```

> As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are maintained in memory by default. Once the TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary data will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides [the configuration item `tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described in the [Limitation](#limitation) section, statements summary tables are cached in memory by default. Once a TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary will be lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB experimentally provides the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) to allow users to enable or disable statements summary persistence.
```

> To enable statements summary persistence, you can add the following configuration to the TiDB configuration file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable statements summary persistence, you can add the following configuration items to the TiDB configuration file:
```

```toml
[instance]
tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent = true

> # The following entries use the default values, which can be modified as needed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# The following entries use the default values, which can be modified as needed.
```
